# Linking brain age gap to mental and physical health <br> in the Berlin Aging Study II
                        
<<<<<<< HEAD
This page contains the analysis scripts referring to our manuscript entitled 'Linking brain age gap to mental and physical health in the Berlin Aging Study II'. We provide a reproducible and portable R environment, all statistical analyisis scripts, as well as several interactive web-based graphs that summarize our analysis results.
=======
This page contains the analysis scripts referring to our manuscript entitled 'Linking brain age gap to mental and physical health in the Berlin Aging Study II'. We also provide a reproducible and portable R environment, as well as several interactive web-based graphs that summarize our analysis results.
>>>>>>> 9ec7f1986ec9b3a8f62dbd54f8fb171c27f87d59

## Abstract
Aging is a ubiquitous risk factor for disease and mortality. From a biological perspective, humans differ in the speed they age, and this may manifest in both mental and physical health disparities. The discrepancy between an individual’s biological and chronological age of the brain (‘brain age gap’) can be assessed by applying machine learning techniques to Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) data. Here, we examined the links between brain age gap and a broad range of cognitive, affective, socioeconomic, lifestyle, and physical health variables in 335 adults of the Berlin Aging Study II. Brain age gap was assessed using a validated prediction model that we previously trained on MRI scans of 32,634 UK Biobank individuals. Our statistical analyses revealed overall stronger evidence for a link between higher brain age gap and less favorable health outcomes than expected under the null hypothesis of no effect, with 80% of the tested associations showing hypothesis-consistent effect directions and 23% reaching nominal significance. The most compelling support was observed for a link with cognitive performance variables including episodic memory, working memory, fluid intelligence, and the digit symbol substitution test. Furthermore, higher brain age gap was associated with fewer years of education, lower household income, higher alcohol intake, higher blood pressure, and higher blood glucose. In sum, our results point towards multifaceted links between brain age gap and human health. Understanding differences in biological brain aging may therefore have broad implications for future informed interventions to preserve mental and physical health in old age.

Keywords: aging, brain age, cognition, mental health, Berlin Aging Study II (BASE-II)


## Interactive and Static Figures
[Fig. 1](https://pjawinski.github.io/base2/code/figures/accuracy.png) - Brain-predicted (‘brain age’) vs. chronological age stratified by sample and tissue class (static)<br>
[Fig. 2](https://pjawinski.github.io/base2/code/figures/main_corr.html) - Partial Pearson correlations between brain age gap and 27 outcome variables (interactive)<br>
[Fig. 3](https://pjawinski.github.io/base2/code/figures/qqplot.pdf) - Permutation-based qq-plots showing the distribution of observed vs. expected p-values stratified by tissue type (static)<br>

[Fig. A1](https://pjawinski.github.io/base2/code/figures/power.pdf) - Power analysis results (static)<br>
[Fig. A2](https://pjawinski.github.io/base2/code/figures/accuracy_matched.png) - Brain-predicted vs. chronological age in BASE-II and matched UKB subset (static)<br>
[Fig. A3](https://pjawinski.github.io/base2/code/figures/intercorr_outcome.html) - Pearson correlations between 27 outcome variables (interactive)<br>
[Fig. A4](https://pjawinski.github.io/base2/code/figures/intercorr_outcome_partial.html) - Partial Pearson correlations between 27 outcome variables (interactive)<br>
[Fig. A5](https://pjawinski.github.io/base2/code/figures/qqplot_all.pdf) - Permutation-based qq-plots showing the distribution of observed vs. expected p-values for all tested associations (static)<br>

### Figure captions
[Fig. 1](https://pjawinski.github.io/base2/code/figures/accuracy.png) - Brain-predicted (‘brain age’) vs. chronological age stratified by sample and tissue class. Blue dots reflect the estimates of the BASE-II sample (N = 335). Grey dots reflect the estimates of the UK Biobank imaging cohort (N = 32,634), among whom age estimation models were trained and applied in a tenfold cross-validation manner. The shown estimates have not been corrected for regression dilution. Prediction accuracy was quantified by MAE (mean absolute error between brain-predicted and chronological age) and rho (Pearson’s correlation coefficient between brain-predicted and chronological age). Please note that due to the different chronological age ranges in BASE-II and UK Biobank, differences in prediction accuracy parameters MAE and rho are an expected finding. Comparison of age prediction accuracies in BASE-II and a matched UK Biobank subset is detailed in supplemental material A (see also suppl. Figure A2.<br>

[Fig. 2](https://pjawinski.github.io/base2/code/figures/main_corr.html) - Partial Pearson correlations between the 27 outcome variables and grey matter, white matter, and combined grey and white matter brain age gap. Effects of sex, age, age2, and total intracranial volume were partialled out. Only cells containing associations with p < 0.05 (one-tailed) have been assigned with colors of the blue and red color palette. Green cells show associations not reaching nominal significance (p ≥ 0.05) but with hypothesis-consistent effect directions. Note that the number of observations varied across the outcome measures so that stronger associations do not necessarily reflect results with lower p-values. We provide an interactive version of this plot with further details on GitHub. TH: time horizon<br>

[Fig. 3](https://pjawinski.github.io/base2/code/figures/qqplot.pdf) - Permutation-based quantile-quantile plots showing the distribution of observed p-values from the association analyses (blue circles) sorted from largest to smallest and plotted against the expected p-values under the null hypothesis (1M permutations; one-tailed testing). The solid diagonal line reflects the mean expected p-values ( log10 scale). The lower and upper bound of the grey shaded area represent the 5th and 95th percentile of the expected p-values. The plots show the association results between the 27 outcome variables and grey matter, white matter, and combined grey and white matter brain age gap, respectively. Overall, quantile quantile-plots suggest that association analyses revealed stronger evidence than expected under the null.<br>


[Fig. A1](https://pjawinski.github.io/base2/code/figures/power.pdf) - Power analysis results showing the probability (1-β) of associations to reach the threshold of significance given true effect sizes ranging between ρ = 0.0 and ρ = 0.4. The blue curves show the probabilities of effects to reach nominal significance (α = 0.05, one-tailed) with n = 335 (solid curve) and n = 160 participants (dashed curve). The red curves show the probabilities of effects to reach the level of significance after multiple-testing correction (α = 0.001, one-tailed) with n = 335 (solid curve) and n = 160 participants (dashed curve). Power analysis was carried out using R package pwr v1.3-0 (Champely, 2020).<br>

[Fig. A2](https://pjawinski.github.io/base2/code/figures/accuracy_matched.png) - Brain-predicted (‘brain age’) vs. chronological age stratified by sample and tissue class. Blue dots reflect the estimates derived from the BASE-II sample (N = 335). Grey dots reflect the estimates derived from the age- and sex-matched UK Biobank subset (N = 3,350), among whom age estimation models were trained and applied in a tenfold cross-validation manner. The shown estimates have not been corrected for regression dilution. Prediction accuracy was quantified by MAE (mean absolute error between brain-predicted and chronological age) and rho (Pearson’s correlation coefficient between brain-predicted and chronological age).<br>

[Fig. A3](https://pjawinski.github.io/base2/code/figures/intercorr_outcome.html) - Pearson correlations between the 27 outcome variables. Only cells with correlations reaching nominal significance (p < 0.05) have been assigned with colors of the blue and red color palette.<br>

[Fig. A4](https://pjawinski.github.io/base2/code/figures/intercorr_outcome_partial.html) - Partial Pearson correlations between the 27 outcome variables. Sex, age, age2, and total intracranial volume served as covariates. Only cells with correlations reaching nominal significance (p < 0.05) have been assigned with colors of the blue and red color palette.<br>

[Fig. A5](https://pjawinski.github.io/base2/code/figures/qqplot_all.pdf) - Permutation-based quantile-quantile plot showing the distribution of observed p-values from the association analyses (blue circles) sorted from largest to smallest and plotted against the expected p-values under the null hypothesis (1M permutations; one-tailed testing). The solid diagonal line reflects the mean expected p-values ( log10 scale). The lower and upper bound of the grey shaded area represent the 5th and 95th percentile of the expected p-values. The plot shows results of 81 tested associations (3 brain age gap variables by 27 outcome variables). Overall, the quantile quantile-plots suggest that association analyses revealed stronger evidence than expected under the null.<br>
